Document reconciliation and idempotency logic for iptables wrapper (#55425)
istio/istio: tools/istio-iptables/pkg/README.md

1. In the current netns context, are there already rules defined in one of (legacy, nft) tables? If so, prefer that one.

Fundamentally, calling code should _never_ make assumptions about which specific `iptables` binary is selected or used or what "the system default" is or should be, and should simply declare the type of operation (`insert/save/restore`) and let the wrapper detection logic in this package pick the correct binary given the environmental context.

## Reconciliation and Idempotency handling

This wrapper implements reconciliation logic to ensure that iptables rules are applied correctly and idempotently across different scenarios (e.g., upgrade and istio-init reruns).
Due to this logic the wrapper will perform the apply and/or a cleanup of iptables depending on the current scenario that has been detected.

The following behaviors can normally occurr:

> 1. **No Delta Detection**: If iptables execution detects no difference between the current and expected/desired state, it skips the apply step unless the `ForceApply` flag is set to true.

Author: Do you mean to flip it like:
- Reconciliation=true: ... explain flow ...
- Reconciliation=false ...  explain flow... (forceApply needs to be mentioned here as well)
- CleanupOnly=true: ...

I would rather keep ForceApply as a side-note of Reconciliation=false because I plan to remove the flag soon (in Istio 1.27 if no bug is reported).

> 1. **No Delta Detection**: If iptables execution detects no difference between the current and expected/desired state, it skips the apply step unless the `ForceApply` flag is set to true.

Reviewer: > Do you mean to flip it like:
> 
>     * Reconciliation=true: ... explain flow ...

Yep. Flag -> valid values -> what it does -> when and why you might want to toggle or set it.

> I would rather keep ForceApply as a side-note of Reconciliation=false because I plan to remove the flag soon (in Istio 1.27 if no bug is reported).

:+1:

1. **First-Time Installation**: If a delta is detected and no "residue" of previous Istio-related rules exists, it initiates a clean installation of the rules which involves only the apply step.
1. **Update Existing Rules**: If the current state differs from the desired state and previous Istio executions are detected, the wrapper:
   - Sets up guardrails (iptables rules that drop all inbound and outbound traffic to prevent traffic escape during the update)
   - Performs cleanup of existing rules
   - Applies new rules
   - Removes guardrails
1. **Cleanup-Only Mode**: If the `CleanupOnly` flag is set to true, only cleanup operations are performed, without applying new rules or setting up guardrails.

### CNI vs. non-CNI Cleanup Differences

The cleanup logic differs between the CNI and non-CNI use cases.
For the CNI, a two-pass cleanup logic is needed to ensure the correctness of the final outcome:

> - **First Pass**: Reverses all rules in the expected/desired state. This may delete non-jump rules in non-Istio chains.

Reviewer: > What I meant is that, by reversing the rules, we eliminate all rules from the expected snapshot. This includes non-jump rules in non-Istio chains for istio-init. While the number of those rules has decreased in recent releases, some still exist (see tproxy mode).

okay, that's what I guessed it meant. We should probably reinforce here that the only exceptions to "this only touches `ISTIO_` prefixed chains and jumps to those chains"  are legacy Istio rules that are effectively a TODO.

- **Second Pass**: Only performed if `Reconcile=true`. The wrapper:
  1. Rechecks the current iptables state
  1. Attempts to delete any jump rule to an Istio chain
  1. Removes any remaining `ISTIO_*` chains

The second pass is essential for CNI because workloads might have been enrolled by different Istio versions or instances with different iptables configurations.
For non-CNI use cases, only the first pass is performed as in `istio-init` only reruns can occur and those always involve a current state that's a subset of the expected state.

### Limitations and guidelines

1. **Order Insensitivity**: States are considered identical if they share the same rules, even if these rules appear in different orders.

> 1. **Non-Istio Chain Rules**: Two states are considered identical if the only difference is that the current state has rules in non-ISTIO chains that are absent in the expected/desired state. This includes jump rules pointing to `ISTIO_*` chains in `OUTPUT`, `INPUT`, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Non-Istio Chain Rules**: Two `iptables` rules snapshots are considered identical if the only difference is that the current snapshot has rules in non-ISTIO chains that are absent in the expected/desired snapshot. This includes jump rules pointing to `ISTIO_*` chains in `OUTPUT`, `INPUT`, etc.
```

Is this a limitation in a userfacing sense? It's mooted by the next bullet which describes the operation that the logic performs immediately after this, right? So no one would ever really "see" this state?

1. **Cleanup Scope**: Second-pass cleanup can only remove leftover Istio chains and jumps to those chains. Any other non-jump rule in non-Istio chains will remain, as there's no reliable way to determine if it was created by Istio or the user.

> To avoid issues with the limitations above, the following guidelines needs to be kept in mind:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To avoid issues with the limitations above, the following guidelines needs to be kept in mind:
```

By who? Users? Istio maintainers writing Istio `iptables` rules? Both?

> 1. Avoid using non-jump rules in non-ISTIO chains, as these can be difficult ```
> (or rather impossible...) to clean if they exist in some configurations but not others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Istio rules should ALWAYS be added to a chain prefixed with ISTIO_ - even if it's just for one rule. Istio code should not insert `iptables` rules into main tables, or non-prefixed chains. The sole exception to this are the required JUMP rules from the main tables to the recommended `ISTIO_` prefixed custom chains.
```
